# Setting up Linux Mint and Windows Dual Boot

## **By Parker Jones**

## Introduction
Dual booting is a common practice now a days and its important to know how to utilize it. This is mainly useful to those who are programmers and developers. Linux provides a better environment for programming and web coding (eg. LAMP stack). Linux is especially good at providing an easy to use C/C++ coding environment (in my personal experience). Now knowing some of the basic pros of Linux, I'm going to walk through the steps in order to dual boot both operating systems on your computer. You can also boot from a flash drive if you prefer to not mess with your HDD/SDD partitions, but I have found dual booting to be the preferred method. 

## Target Audience
This tutorial is not terribly difficult, however, it can lead to some unintended consequences if steps aren't followed correctly. That being said I highly suggest you keep a backup of your files and a windows install disk in the event that you accidently wipe a partition that you were using for windows. With those pitfalls, I wouldn't recommend this tutorial to anyone who doesn't have atleast 1-2 years experience of working with/on computers.

## Methodology
**Step 1: Create live USB**
This step requires you create a bootable linux drive from a USB or disk. This step is very easy with no risk, and if you only want to boot from flashdrive instead of dual boot this is pretty much your only required step. To accomplish this you need to download a tool to write the linux .iso image to a disk/flashdrive. I personally use Universal USB Installer. Which can be found here: https://www.pendrivelinux.com/universal-usb-installer-easy-as-1-2-3/ Next you need to download your linux mint .iso. This can be found here: https://linuxmint.com/download.php Make sure you download Linux Mint Cinnamon as it is the most popular. Once these are complete, go ahead and run Universal Installer. It will as you to select the OS you want to use and then select the .iso file for that OS to go on your flashdrive. Make sure your flashdrive is empty or backed up, as formatting it will wipe its contents. Next, select your flashdrive from the drive selection drop down. MAKE SURE YOU SELECTED YOUR FLASHDRIVE OR YOU WILL WIPE YOUR HARDDRIVE PARTITIONS. Once your flashdrive is selected go ahead and hit the create button down below.

**Step 2: Create Linux Mint Partition on your HDD/SSD**
This is by far the most "dangerous" step in that if you delete the wrong partition you can wipe your windows OS and consequently your files stored on there. First you want to open the Disk Management tool in windows. Once it is open, select the harddrive you want to install Linux mint on, right click and select the option "Shrink Volume". Linux mint is usually ~10 gb in size, I personally recommend creating a partition about 40-100 GB in size just so you have space to save what ever files or programs you want. Once the partition is made we can move on to the next step. **Important:** remember the name of the partition you created since you will need it to finish this process.

**Step 3: Boot into your created Live USB**
This part is fairly simple, just restart your computer. When the BIOS screen pops up when restarting you need to press the keyboard key to open the BIOS. This varies from computer to computer, for me its F11 but for you it might be F10 or F12. The screen loads and disappears pretty fast so it may take a couple attempts to find the key you need to press and press it before the restart leaves the BIOS screen. Once you're in the BIOS find the option to boot from USB or removable media. Select this option and hit enter to boot into your USB.

**Step 4: Installation of Linux Mint**
The boot time of the USB will likely be much longer than your usual boot time so be patient. Once it has booted you will be greeted by a Desktop GUI. On the desktop there should be an option titled "Install Linux Mint". Unsurprisingly, you need to run this. You'll initially have to fill out some basic information like what language you want to install in. Then linux will do some checks on your battery, memory space, and internet connection.

**Step 5: Prepare Partition**
This is the most important part of the installation. Once youre greeted with the Installation Type window, you want to select the bottom option "Something Else - you can create or resize partitions yourself..." This will take you to another Installation Type screen which displays your current partitions and your free space. Click on the free space and hit the "+" button towards the bottom left of the page. Now you will be greeted with another window. On this window go ahead and set the size for your root to be 15 or so GB. Fill out the page accordingly -- Partition type: Logical, Location for new Partition: Beginning of this space, Use as: EXT4, Mount Point: /
Next you need to create your swap size, this isn't so important to the average user so just set its size to 4 GB and set Use As: swap area. Lastly, we need to create our home partition, do the same thing as before but make your settings as follows -- Size: max (this partition will hold all your files so make it as big as you can), Partition Type: Logical, Location: Beginning, Use as: EXT4, and Mount Point: /home Once this is finished hit install now in the bottom right.

**Step 6: Fill out Linux Mint trivial Information**
This part is really easy, just follow the install window and fill out the information accordingly. You will have to fill out your timezone, keyboard layout, and login information. Once this is finished hit continue. Now linux mint will begin installing to the partition you created. Once its done it will ask you to either continue testing in USB mode or restart. Go ahead and restart. Once your computer has begun restarting you will be greeted with an option to boot into linux mint or windows on the GRUB screen (Grub is the bootloader). Select Linux mint and you are good to go. You just successfully dual booted linux mint and windows!!!

If you don't know what to do now that you are booted in linux mint just google search what to do and there are plenty of tutorials out on the web for all sorts of things! Have fun, and enjoy your new operating system!
